Update installation page (#595)
scipy/scipy.org: content/en/install.md

see [Installing with type stubs](#type-stubs).

[static type stubs]: https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/libraries.html

<a name="environment-based"></a>

## Environment-based workflows

In environment-based workflows, you install packages into an environment, which you
can activate and deactivate.

If you have installed Python, you can create a virtual environment with a tool such
as `venv` - see [the tutorial in the Python Packaging User Guide][venv-guide].
You can then install [SciPy from PyPI], the Python Package Index, with [`pip`]:

    python -m pip install scipy

[venv-guide]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/#creating-virtual-environments
[SciPy from PyPI]: https://pypi.org/project/scipy/
[`pip`]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/getting-started/

Alternatively, you can install [SciPy from conda-forge] using a [Conda]-based
environment manager. You can install Python itself, as well as packages in
languages other than Python, as Conda packages.

[Miniforge] is the recommended way to install `conda` and [`mamba`],
two Conda-based environment managers. You can then install SciPy as follows:

    conda install scipy # or

>     mamba install scipy

Author: I've left `mamba` in for now, but perhaps we don't need to mention it? It is discoverable from the Miniforge homepage, and to be honest I'm still not clear on how mamba 2.0 compares to conda.

You can add [SciPy from PyPI] to a [`uv`] project:

    uv add scipy

You can also install Python itself with `uv`.

[`uv`]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/

If you work with non-Python packages, you may prefer to install SciPy as
a Conda package, so that you can use the same workflow for packages which
are not available on PyPI.

You can add [SciPy from conda-forge] to a [`pixi`] project:

    pixi add scipy

Pixi can also install packages from PyPI, using `uv` under the hood.

[`pixi`]: https://pixi.sh/latest/

<a name="system-package-managers"></a>

## Installing system-wide via a system package manager

System package managers can install the most common Python packages.
They install packages for the entire computer, often use older versions,
and don't have as many available versions. They are not the recommended
installation method, but they are the simplest.

### Ubuntu and Debian

Using `apt-get`:

    sudo apt-get install python3-scipy

### Fedora

Using `dnf`:

    sudo dnf install python3-scipy

### macOS

macOS doesn't have a preinstalled package manager, but you can install
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and use it to install SciPy (and Python itself):

>     brew install scipy

Reviewer: `brew` is falling more and more out of favour as it has a horrible permissions model: Only one user can use it on one system OOTB. I'd recommend MacPorts if we want something Mac-specific.

Reviewer 2: I did not hear MacPort being mentioned in years. Both around OSS and professionally. Do you have any supporting material to back that statement up? 😅

Reviewer: About the multi-user issue with Homebrew:

> If you need to run Homebrew in a multi-user environment, consider creating a separate user account specifically for use of Homebrew.

From [the docs](https://docs.brew.sh/FAQ#why-does-homebrew-say-sudo-is-bad).

A lot of workarounds for per-user installs are unsupported: [1](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation#untar-anywhere-unsupported) [2](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation#multiple-installations-unsupported).

I don't use MacPorts personally; mostly `pixi` these days; but Homebrew is a potential footgun for the uninitiated.

Reviewer 3: MacPorts is still a thing, but we should keep Homebrew. It's the most popular package manager on macOS, and the limitation of no per-user installs on a shared machine is pretty niche, I haven't seen that come up as an issue before. We can add MacPorts of course. Both aren't recommended either way I'd say, since they're similar to system package managers. Users are better off knowing how to create environments (whether venvs or conda envs).

Reviewer: > the limitation of no per-user installs on a shared machine is pretty niche

That's one limitation -- another is that the global installation cannot be ergonomically used by multiple users. The only supported way to do that is to imitate another user; as the permissions are tied to a user, not a group.

Reviewer 4: This is related to the "projects" discussion, but Homebrew has recently made their Python installation considerably less friendly to beginners, by implementing the "virtualenv-only pip" PEP - and in particular, strongly deprecating `--user` installs - see discussion at https://github.com/orgs/Homebrew/discussions/3404 .

<a name="building-from-source"></a>

## Building from source

A word of warning: building SciPy from source can be a nontrivial exercise. We

> recommend using binaries instead if those are available for your platform.

Author: ```suggestion
recommend using binaries instead if those are available for your platform
via one of the above methods.
```

sidebar: false
---

The recommended method of installing SciPy depends on your preferred workflow.
The common workflows can roughly be broken down into the following
categories:

- [Environment-based (e.g. `pip`, `conda`)](#environment-based) (the traditional workflow)

> - [Project-based (e.g. `uv`, `pixi`)](#project-based) (recommended for new users)

Reviewer 5: The installations page should be for beginners, and they likely won't follow the project-based route. These are people who just want to get "import scipy" to work.

I think an explicit recommendation is a good idea, because newcomers should read this and immediately be able to say: "ah! this is how I install SciPy" without too many questions. I.e., we need to reduce the number of choices they have to make to as close to zero as possible.

If you want to be more nuanced about it, you could say, for env based: "recommended for beginners", and for project-based: "recommended for advanced users".

Author: > If you want to be more nuanced about it, you could say, for env based: "recommended for beginners", and for project-based: "recommended for advanced users".

see my comment below in the project-based section

- [System package managers](#system-package-managers) (simplest)
- [Building from source](#building-from-source) (for debugging and development)

To install SciPy with [static type stubs],
see [Installing with type stubs](#type-stubs).

[static type stubs]: https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/libraries.html

<a name="environment-based"></a>

## Environment-based workflows

In environment-based workflows, you install packages into an environment, which you
can activate and deactivate.

> If you have installed Python, you can create a virtual environment with a tool such

Reviewer 5: "a tool such as" --- this suggests an external tool. I'd make explicit, e.g. "Python's built-in venv manager" or "Python's built-in venv tool".

Author: right, I was trying to also implicitly accommodate `virtualenv` and whatever other venv-like tools are used. But I agree that just mentioning `venv` here more clearly is probably sufficient.

as `venv` - see [the tutorial in the Python Packaging User Guide][venv-guide].
You can then install [SciPy from PyPI], the Python Package Index, with [`pip`]:

    python -m pip install scipy

[venv-guide]: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/#creating-virtual-environments
[SciPy from PyPI]: https://pypi.org/project/scipy/
[`pip`]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/getting-started/

> Alternatively, you can install [SciPy from conda-forge] using a [Conda]-based
> environment manager. You can install Python itself, as well as packages in
> languages other than Python, as Conda packages.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can install [SciPy from conda-forge] using a [Conda]-based
environment manager. Conda is a full-fledged package manager, so you can also use it to install Python itself, compilers, and other languages.
```

Or, if you prefer different wording, the idea here is to make explicit the feature of conda being advertised.

[Miniforge] is the recommended way to install `conda` and [`mamba`],
two Conda-based environment managers. You can then install SciPy as follows:

    conda install scipy # or
    mamba install scipy

[SciPy from conda-forge]: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/scipy
[Miniforge]: https://conda-forge.org/download/
[Conda]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/index.html
[`mamba`]: https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

<a name="project-based"></a>

## Project-based workflows

> In project-based workflows, a project is a directory containing a manifest

Reviewer 5: So, who are we targeting here? I can think of two groups:

(1) User who got hold of some random package, now wants to get that package ready for use. Is it our responsibility to provide package development instructions? Probably not.

(2) A user who is starting out with their own application , and wants to add a mechanism for setting up the exact right environment, including SciPy. This is a more reasonable group to target—although again I'm not sure it's the right place. Maybe simply point to `uv` and `pixi` website documentation?

Either way, these users are advanced, so they won't be arriving at the SciPy docs, trying to figure out how to add SciPy to uv/pixi envs.

Reviewer 6: I would disagree that people using `uv` / `pixi` are always advanced, we get _a lot_ of beginner questions, i.e., "this is my first time using a Python project".

Anyway, if the installation is ever more complicated than `uv add scipy` I'm happy to add a dedicated integration page to the uv documentation.

Reviewer 5: My question is more: "what is the path that takes someone to the SciPy installation page to ask about uv" and then "did they land in the right spot, or should they be sent somewhere else". I.e., if they're asking the right question, relevant to SciPy, we should absolutely answer it. If there's a more general resource we can point to, best to do that (community wide).

Reviewer 5: @lucascolley I think if you want to describe, from an absolute beginner's perspective, how to get an environment set up using uv, that's fine too. What was there felt like too high level for a newcomer to start with. You'd have to explain which directory they should be in, how to activate the environment, how often they need to do that, how to install packages (per your snippet above), etc. And then it really feels more like an alternative env manager, rather than "project based". People who want to set up projects *should* be able to find good guides out there (pyopensci?).

Author: > You'd have to explain which directory they should be in, how to activate the environment, how often they need to do that, how to install packages (per your snippet above), etc. And then it really feels more like an alternative env manager, rather than "project based".

Okay, sounds good. I guess that would mean we can avoid repeating similar instructions for `pip` and `conda`? If so, is the recommendation of `uv`/`pixi` for new users justified?

Reviewer 7: isn't it reasonable to assume that `uv` and `pixie` users already know how to install `scipy` once they've seen that `pip install scipy` is an option?

Author: > isn't it reasonable to assume that uv and pixie users already know how to install scipy

Yeah, so I think `uv add scipy` in itself wasn't helpful. We should instead be targeting people who are not experienced with either `uv`/`pixi` or `pip`/`conda` yet.

file describing the project, a lock-file describing the exact dependencies
of the project, and the project's (potentially multiple) environments.
These workflows provide reproducibility benefits over environment-based workflows.

You can add [SciPy from PyPI] to a [`uv`] project:

    uv add scipy

You can also install Python itself with `uv`.

[`uv`]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/

If you work with non-Python packages, you may prefer to install SciPy as
a Conda package, so that you can use the same workflow for packages which
are not available on PyPI.

You can add [SciPy from conda-forge] to a [`pixi`] project:

    pixi add scipy

Pixi can also install packages from PyPI, using `uv` under the hood.

[`pixi`]: https://pixi.sh/latest/

<a name="system-package-managers"></a>

## Installing system-wide via a system package manager

System package managers can install the most common Python packages.
They install packages for the entire computer, often use older versions,
and don't have as many available versions. They are not the recommended

> installation method, but they are the simplest.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
installation method.
```

Causes a lot of headaches, so wouldn't give any suggestion that this route is simple. E.g., on Debian you run into issues because you can't subsequently pip install without special flags.

Reviewer 5: It's pretty short, and it covers a couple of common use-cases, so I think OK to keep for now.

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and use it to install SciPy (and Python itself):

    brew install scipy

<a name="building-from-source"></a>

## Building from source

A word of warning: building SciPy from source can be a nontrivial exercise. We
recommend using binaries instead if those are available for your platform
via one of the above methods.
For details on how to build from source, see
[the building from source guide in the SciPy docs][building-docs].

[building-docs]: https://scipy.github.io/devdocs/building/index.html

<a name="type-stubs"></a>

## Installing with type stubs

Static type stubs are available via a separate package, `scipy-stubs`, on
PyPI and conda-forge. If you have already installed SciPy, you just need to
install `scipy-stubs` in the same way:

    python -m pip install scipy-stubs # or
    uv add scipy-stubs # or
    conda install scipy-stubs # or
    pixi add scipy-stubs

<!---
XXX: https://github.com/conda-forge/scipy-stubs-feedstock/pull/5
-->

You can also install SciPy and `scipy-stubs` as a single package,
via the `scipy-stubs[scipy]` extra on PyPI, or the `scipy-typed`
package on conda-forge.

> To get a specific version `x.y.z` of SciPy (such as `1.14.1`),
> you should install version `x.y.z.*` below:
> 
>     python -m pip install "scipy-stubs[scipy]" # or
>     # versions for illustrative purposes
>     uv add "scipy-stubs[scipy]==1.14.1.*" # or
>     conda install "scipy-typed>=1.14" # or
>     pixi add "scipy-typed=1.15.0.*"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

I suggest keeping this section short, to keep the overall document concise. These instructions seem fairly self-evident, and is likely also documented on the pypi / conda pages for `scipy-stubs`.

Reviewer 5: Can we combine the code snippets, perhaps, so there's One Recommended Way of installing SciPy + stubs?

Author: > One Recommended Way of installing SciPy + stubs?

On the one hand, most existing users will just want to now how to install the stubs on top of their existing SciPy installation. But on the other hand, installing both at once seems much more suitable for a "how to install SciPy" guide, and ensures versions stay in sync. I don't think I'm confident choosing one over the other.

Author: perhaps we just mention how to install both at once here, but also say something like "to install `scipy-stubs` and `scipy` at once". Then users with existing installations should be able to infer that they can just install `scipy-stubs` instead.

Reviewer 7: > I don't think the versioning of scipy-stubs is immediately self-evident without someone being told about it

Most stubs-only packages use a similar versioning scheme, but there are probably many that haven't used stubs-only packages before.

sidebar: false
---

The recommended method of installing SciPy depends on your preferred workflow.
The common workflows can roughly be broken down into the following
categories:

- [Project-based (e.g. `uv`, `pixi`)](#project-based) (recommended for new users)
- [Environment-based (e.g. `pip`, `conda`)](#environment-based) (the traditional workflow)
- [System package managers](#system-package-managers) (not recommended)
- [Building from source](#building-from-source) (for debugging and development)

To install SciPy with [static type stubs],
see [Installing with type stubs](#type-stubs).

[static type stubs]: https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/guides/libraries.html

<a name="project-based"></a>

## Project-based workflows

> In project-based workflows, a project is a directory containing a manifest

Reviewer 5: This is, according to the new text above, the recommended route for newcomers. So, the first thing a newcomer reads is "manifest", "lock-file", "dependencies". Yikes!

How about these more common use-cases:

- I found a snippet on StackOverflow and want to play with it in IPython or Jupyter.
- I am reading the Scientific Python lecture notes and want to try some examples.
- I am studying the SciPy API guide / other docs and want to try some code snippets I see.

When you make project-based the default installation path, the instructions that come with tutorials won't work. Nothing will work, as stated below, without quite a bit of future reading.

So I'll reiterate my earlier suggestion that you make this as simple as possible for someone who just wants to get going to see how the project works. And my strong feeling is that that route is pip or conda, and not starting a new project.

Author: > So, the first thing a newcomer reads is "manifest", "lock-file", "dependencies". Yikes!

Agreed 😅 I think this is solvable by moving this below to the discussion of how environment-based workflows are different. It made more sense before I swapped the sections.

> When you make project-based the default installation path, the instructions that come with tutorials won't work. Nothing will work, as stated below, without quite a bit of further reading.

For my understanding, could you point to some tutorial instructions for which this would be problematic?

{{< admonition tip >}}
If it is your first time installing a Python library, start here!
{{< /admonition >}}

Here is a step-by-step guide to setting up a project to try SciPy, with [`uv`],
a Python package manager.

[`uv`]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/

> 1. Install `uv`, following [the instructions in the `uv` documentation][install-uv].

Author: @zanieb I wonder whether the instructions in the `uv` docs could be made even more beginner-friendly? Perhaps for people who aren't familiar with using a terminal, where you say "use `curl`", you could instead say something like "use `curl` in a terminal prompt", and maybe link out to an explanation of how to get a terminal/shell on different OSs?

[`uv`]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/

1. Install `uv`, following [the instructions in the `uv` documentation][install-uv].

[install-uv]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/

2.  Create a new project in a new subdirectory, by executing the following in a terminal:

        uv init try-scipy
        cd try-scipy

    {{< admonition hint >}}
The second command changes directory into the directory of your project.

>     {{< /admonition >}}

Author: @jarrodmillman, I believe the linter is suggesting changes which would break the formatting.

Reviewer 8: You could try something like
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
...
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
```

3.  Install Python:

>         uv python install

Reviewer 6: I'd omit this — by default, we'll install Python if it's not installed yet. I don't have a strong preference though.

Reviewer 6: (Similar to the Pixi instructions)

Author: omitted!

        uv add scipy

5.  Try out SciPy!

        uv run python

    This will launch a Python interpreter session, from which you can `import scipy`.

See next steps in [the SciPy user guide][scipy-user-guide].

[scipy-user-guide]: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/tutorial/

### Installing with `pixi`

If you work with non-Python packages, you may prefer to install SciPy as
a [Conda] package, so that you can use the same workflow for packages which
are not available on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/), the Python Package Index.
Conda can manage packages in any language, so you can use it to install
Python itself, compilers, and other languages.

[Conda]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/index.html

The steps to install SciPy from [conda-forge] using the package management
tool [`pixi`] are very similar to the steps for `uv`:

[conda-forge]: https://conda-forge.org/
[`pixi`]: https://pixi.sh/latest/

1. Install `pixi`, following [the instructions in the `pixi` documentation][install-pixi].

[install-pixi]: https://pixi.sh/latest/

2.  Create a new project in a new subdirectory:

        pixi init try-scipy
        cd try-scipy

3.  Add SciPy to your project:

>         uv add scipy

Reviewer 9: Now I'm getting confused -- shouldn't `uv` be `pixi` here?

Reviewer 9: Looks like you fixed this one just now.

    {{< admonition note >}}
This step also adds Python from conda-forge.
    {{< /admonition >}}

4.  Try out SciPy!

        pixi run python

See next steps in [the SciPy user guide][scipy-user-guide].

<a name="environment-based"></a>

## Environment-based workflows

In environment-based workflows, you install packages into an environment, which you
can activate and deactivate.
These workflows are well-established,
but lack some reproducibility benefits of project-based workflows.

### Installing with `pip`

> 1.  [Install Python](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

Reviewer 9: Of course, you can use `uv` to do this as well and then switch back to being a simple `venv` dinosaur like me. But there are indeed already some comments about choice paralysis I think.

Author: Yeah, I considered leaving out the hyperlink and letting users google "how to install Python" - could do that if people prefer. I don't think we should be laying out different options for installing Python.

Reviewer 5: It looks like the uv folks are urging people to [switch away from activating virtual environments](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/1910#issuecomment-2498847428). And they have good technical reasons for it.

That's all fine if you've decided to switch everything to UV, but it feels problematic from a higher level UI perspective. `python myscript.py` now becomes `some-tool-name run myscript.py`, so it (a) introduces a layer on top of Python (not ideal for newcomers) and (b) binds you into a specific, non-general invocation pattern.

As I mentioned before, I suspect this pattern might break a lot of existing tutorial advice, scripts with `#!/usr/bin/env python`, etc. In fact, that's a question I'm very curious about: how does `uv` intend for developers to use it if they require `uv run` for everything? (I'm speaking from complete ignorance here, of course, since I haven't studied uv at all.)

I also don't like that users now need to know about `uv` and `pip` and `uv pip`. It's often possible to plot some narrow trajectory with these tools where you hide much of the complexity (and we should have a community guide from that, perhaps via PyOpenSci, if they don't already). But then things break and you have a lot of concepts to understand before you can debug, and only uv-specific resources are helpful.

Anyway, these are just my high-level concerns; I'm sure they can all be addressed in one way for another, and I appreciate you having patience with me as I iterate them.

Reviewer 10: Adding to what Stefan said --- and I also never used uv --- how does the workflow with a test script in a separate repository work with auto-activation?

```
$ mamba activate scipy-dev
$ python dev.py shell
$ cd ~/tmp/
$ python failing_script_with a breakpoint.py
```

Same question about working on a project (scipy) and its dependency (scipy-doctest):

```
$ mamba activate scipy-dev
$ cd scipy-doctest
$ hack hack hack
# ..... in a second terminal window
$ mamba activate scipy-dev
$ cd scipy
$ python dev.py test 
```

Reviewer 3: > Same question about working on a project (scipy) and its dependency (scipy-doctest)

The one word answer is "workspaces" (implemented in `uv`, see https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/workspaces/, work in progress in `pixi`). In `pixi` right now you can do what you must also do with pip/conda: you manually install one then develop the other, without tracking the dependency between these packages. There is no good way to do it today outside of workspaces (and no, editable installs don't count since those are inherently incomplete).

Reviewer 10: Uhm, it can't be that uncommon to have to fix a dependency? The behavior is
- in the environment I've an editable install of a dependency (scipy-doctest, but it can be numpy or anything)
- in one terminal I'm in the dependency tree, in the "bugfix" branch where I'm adding fixes
- in the other terminal I'm in the scipy tree, where I'm running scipy tests; might be also adding fixes to match

That it's an editable install is not very relevant (can be any other way to install the dependency _in this specific environment_), the choice of the env manager is irrelevant (can be mamba or venv or virtualenvwrapper or ...), the pair of projects can be anything. The main point is the ability to have two unrelated project / git trees in the same environment.

Reviewer 5: I think Python has to become uv run everywhere.

Reviewer 3: > but it can be numpy or anything

You actually can't with editable installs of `numpy` and say `scipy` or `scikit-learn`, it won't build the package that depends on `numpy`.

> The main point is the ability to have two unrelated project / git trees in the same environment.

That is correct. This is about the same with both methods (ignoring workspaces). In the `pip`/`conda` case you have to do `cd pkg1 && pip install .` then `cd pkg2 && pip install .  # or similar`, manually keeping track of the two packages both having a dev version installed, then running your tests. If you iteratively work on `pkg1` and `pkg2`, you just have to manage the state in your head. You can do that with `pixi` or `uv` as well - it's maybe very slightly more clumsy.

> Uhm, it can't be that uncommon to have to fix a dependency?

In the grand scheme of things, it is uncommon (>95% of users only consume rather than develop packages to start with). It's harder for project-based tools, hence I think it wasn't their first priority. But the workspaces concept was basically copied from Cargo, and seems like a good answer conceptually.

2.  Create and activate a virtual environment with `venv`.

   {{< admonition hint >}}
See [the tutorial in the Python Packaging User Guide](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/#creating-virtual-environments).

>    {{< /admonition >}}

Author: this indentation looks redundant - the admonition doesn't indent as there is no body of the bullet to bind to, it seems.

### macOS

macOS doesn't have a preinstalled package manager, but you can install
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and use it to install SciPy (and Python itself):

    brew install scipy

<a name="building-from-source"></a>

## Building from source

A word of warning: building SciPy from source can be a nontrivial exercise. We
recommend using binaries instead if those are available for your platform
via one of the above methods.
For details on how to build from source, see
[the building from source guide in the SciPy docs][building-docs].

[building-docs]: https://scipy.github.io/devdocs/building/index.html

<a name="type-stubs"></a>

## Installing with type stubs

Static type stubs are available via a separate package, `scipy-stubs`, on
PyPI and conda-forge.
You can also install SciPy and `scipy-stubs` as a single package,
via the `scipy-stubs[scipy]` extra on PyPI, or the `scipy-typed`
package on conda-forge.
To get a specific version `x.y.z` of SciPy (such as `1.14.1`),
you should install version `x.y.z.*`, for example:

    uv add "scipy-stubs[scipy]==1.14.1.*" # or
    pixi add "scipy-typed=1.15.0.*" # or
    python -m pip install "scipy-stubs[scipy]" # or

>     conda install "scipy-typed>=1.14"

Reviewer 5: This section reads very nicely now, btw, thanks!

In conda, does scipy-typed automatically match up with SciPy? If so, then this section is :ok_hand:

Author: > In conda, does scipy-typed automatically match up with SciPy?

Yep! The relevant lines from the recipe are https://github.com/conda-forge/scipy-stubs-feedstock/blob/fc110f760877e2b8cfe169cb9f54d308ffeb7bd9/recipe/meta.yaml#L38-L47 and https://github.com/conda-forge/scipy-stubs-feedstock/blob/fc110f760877e2b8cfe169cb9f54d308ffeb7bd9/recipe/meta.yaml#L1-L2.

Reviewer 7: FYI, `scipy-stubs==1.15.0.0` is [almost ready](https://github.com/jorenham/scipy-stubs/issues/250), so I'll definitely be able to release it *before* the `scipy==1.15.0` final release.

In contrast,
in environment-based workflows you install packages into an environment,
which you can activate and deactivate from any directory.
These workflows are well-established,
but lack some reproducibility benefits of project-based workflows.

### Installing with `pip`

1.  [Install Python](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

2.  Create and activate a virtual environment with `venv`.

    {{< admonition hint >}}
See [the tutorial in the Python Packaging User Guide](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/#creating-virtual-environments).
    {{< /admonition >}}

3.  Install SciPy, using [`pip`]:

        python -m pip install scipy

[`pip`]: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/getting-started/

### Installing with `conda`

[Miniforge] is the recommended way to install `conda` and [`mamba`],
two Conda-based environment managers.
After creating an environment, you can install SciPy from conda-forge as follows:

    conda install scipy # or
    mamba install scipy

[Miniforge]: https://conda-forge.org/download/
[`mamba`]: https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

<a name="system-package-managers"></a>

> ## Installing system-wide via a system package manager

Reviewer 5: Since these methods are so problematic, we could consider only keeping the first sentence (warning) and not giving individual instructions for Debian, Fedora, and macos here.

Optionally, we could then show the route I mentioned elsewhere, which works perfectly well: install Python via system and then just create a virtual env using `python -m venv`. Since this page is no longer the beginner guide, I think that should be acceptable?

The suggestion is not needed for this PR, but if it seems like a sensible suggestion I'm happy to make a follow-up PR in the future.

Author: > Since these methods are so problematic, we could consider only keeping the first sentence (warning) and not giving individual instructions for Debian, Fedora, and macos here.

I would be happy with that, let's see what others think.

> Optionally, we could then show the route I mentioned elsewhere, which works perfectly well: install Python via system and then just create a virtual env using python -m venv. Since this page is no longer the beginner guide, I think that should be acceptable?

How does that differ from https://deploy-preview-595--scipy-org.netlify.app/install/#installing-with-pip? Just installing Python with a system package manager rather than python.org? I said in another thread that I would be happy to remove the hyperlink to python.org, but I thought that listing out options for installing Python might be overkill.

> The suggestion is not needed for this PR, but if it seems like a sensible suggestion I'm happy to make a follow-up PR in the future.

👍

System package managers can install the most common Python packages.
They install packages for the entire computer, often use older versions,
and don't have as many available versions. They are not the recommended
installation method.

### Ubuntu and Debian

Using `apt-get`:

    sudo apt-get install python3-scipy

### Fedora

Using `dnf`:

    sudo dnf install python3-scipy

### macOS

macOS doesn't have a preinstalled package manager, but you can install
[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and use it to install SciPy (and Python itself):

    brew install scipy

<a name="building-from-source"></a>

## Building from source

A word of warning: building SciPy from source can be a nontrivial exercise. We
recommend using binaries instead if those are available for your platform
via one of the above methods.
For details on how to build from source, see
[the building from source guide in the SciPy docs][building-docs].

> [building-docs]: https://scipy.github.io/devdocs/building/index.html

Reviewer 5: Given the default recommendation to use `uv` for projects, I was wondering whether, in the future, we should adjust the above page accordingly?

I presume it can be used the same way pip is for SciPy development, adding a third code tab with `uv run python dev.py` and `uv pip` for installing dependencies?

Author: > Given the default recommendation to use uv for projects, I was wondering whether, in the future, we should adjust the above page accordingly?

Yep! Although for SciPy, given the compiler dependencies, Pixi will probably be our best bet. I already use https://github.com/rgommers/pixi-dev-scipystack for all of my SciPy development. Windows support for PyTorch and JAX on conda-forge is still maturing (though actively - https://github.com/conda-forge/pytorch-cpu-feedstock/pull/231), but we may be able to use PyPI on Windows to fill some gaps if anyone needs it.

A third tab for `uv` is probably not so useful, since it's relatively obvious what to do by following along with the `pip` instructions, and you have to do the same setup of system deps.

> I presume it can be used the same way pip is for SciPy development, adding a third code tab with uv run python dev.py and uv pip for installing dependencies?

All that to say that we could do something like this. Or we could make a new page instead of adding a new tab, since there is much less to explain when most of the work is already done in writing the Pixi manifest. We may want to wait until somebody wants to try to merge Pixi support into the main repo, though.

Reviewer 5: Thanks, Lucas!

sidebar: false
---

Installation methods include:

- [Python Distributions](#distributions)
- [PyPI (`pip`, `uv`)](#pypi-install)
- [conda-forge (`conda`, `mamba`, `pixi`)](#conda-forge-install)
- [System Package Managers](#system-package-manager)
- [Source](#source)

Methods differ in ease of use, coverage, maintenance of old versions,
system-wide versus local environment use, and control. When installing
from PyPI or with Conda, you can control the package versions for a specific
project to prevent conflicts. Conda also controls non-Python packages,
like MKL or HDF5. System package managers, like `apt-get`, install
across the entire computer, often have older versions, and don't have
as many available versions. Source compilation is much more difficult
but is necessary for debugging and development. If you don't know which
installation method you need or prefer, we recommend the Scientific
Python Distribution [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/download/).

> Users in large, non-university institutions may want to read Anaconda's

Reviewer 2: I won't block, but I disagree with putting this here. Users to which this really applies need to do such analysis anyway for all the tools they use, have procurement teams, etc.

This only sends a bad message for Anaconda which has been giving a lot (and still do) to this community.

Author: I think it is a useful pointer for us to include, and I don't think that linking out to Anaconda's own blog post sends a bad message (if anything, it could help make users who should be paying Anaconda aware that they need to!)

I think there were valid concerns raised in  https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zfncPEtNgI86pm8AhJ50DCGSTexcEIuA6jUofy2yqvU/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.exik8qo8laee about a situation which was pretty confusing (at least for me) to understand, and Anaconda's blog post helpfully explained it.

But I also won't block, if folks would rather not include this :)

Reviewer 2: I remember being against that doc and NF having an opinion 😉 This is political at best, again users to which this applies know what to do. There won't be many large orgs which don't have a proper process around compliant tooling. People who don't pay do it on purpose and this note won't help.

Also from a practical point of view, such link tend to break as time pass. And the TOC can always change.

Reviewer 3: I think we should just change the recommendations to only use Conda-forge. There is no reason to use `defaults` at this point if you're an individual user trying to figure this stuff out. So we get rid of https://www.anaconda.com/download/ and then we don't need to worry about the ToS drama.

Author: > So we get rid of https://www.anaconda.com/download/

Are you suggesting removing the whole "Scientific Python Distributions" section?

Reviewer 3: Yes

  and the IEP interactive development environment; Supports Linux,
  Windows, and Mac.

If you already have Python installed, you can

> [install SciPy with `pip`](#pip-install).

Author: not necessarily true but I think it's close enough to true for here

For more advanced users who will need to install or upgrade regularly,
you may prefer to use a dedicated package manager like [`uv`]
(see [Installing with `uv`](#uv-install)),

> [Conda], or [`pixi`] (see [Installing from conda-forge](#conda-forge-install)).

Reviewer 2: -1 for Pixi. Looking at how things are moving right now, uv is going to completely shadow such alternative solution.

Author: I think it is worthwhile to mention it, at least while uv cannot handle conda packages (https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/1703). In my experience, it is nice to have one tool for everything, rather than having to use something else for non-PyPI packages.

Reviewer 2: I left an upvote on the issue and pinged Charlie to get some visibility. He helped us gladly in the past with Ruff 🤞

Reviewer 2: @zanieb 😃 since you asked. Thanks 🙏

Reviewer 6: We're not actively working on support for installing things from Conda in uv, so I think it's reasonable to have an alternative suggestion. Whether you prefer to just suggest using `mamba` or `pixi` seems dependent on how important the "project" use-case is. My 2-cents is that project-focused users usually use PyPI while the Conda users are usually more "environment" focused — in which case a project-based approach offered by uv and pixi is less important.

Reviewer 6: That's great to hear! I definitely think Pixi is great and that project-based workflows are better than maintaining imperative global environments :) I'm just not sure how common it is.

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's constructive at all to say no to `pixi` because of `uv. Basically, `uv` is a very nice upgrade from `pip` & co, while `pixi is a very nice upgrade from `conda` & co. 

> I guess I am bucking the trend by being a conda & project-workflow enjoyer then :)

I don't think you are. Many maintainers I talk to are excited about Pixi, because it gives more reproducible workflows. And as soon as you include compiled code, it can give you reproducibility in a way that PyPI-only tooling simply cannot.

[`uv`]: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/
[Conda]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/index.html
[`pixi`]: https://pixi.sh/latest/

<a name="pypi-install"></a>

> ## Installing from PyPI

Reviewer 6: Is the _source_ of the installation the major thing to split on here? Or should it be more like:

- Installing into an environment
   - Using pip, uv, or conda
- Adding to your project
    - Using uv or pixi
- Installing system-wide
    - ...

Author: That sounds pretty good to me! Although it is more of a departure from the existing text

SciPy is [available on PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/scipy/), the Python Package Index.

<a name="pip-install"></a>

> ### Installing with `pip`

Author: perhaps better without these subheadings?

You can install SciPy from PyPI with `pip`:

    python -m pip install scipy

<a name="uv-install"></a>

### Installing with `uv`

You can also add SciPy from PyPI to a `uv` project:

    uv add scipy

<a name="conda-forge-install"></a>

## Installing from conda-forge

### Installing with `conda` or `mamba`

[`Miniforge`] is the recommended way to install the `conda`

> (and `mamba`, a faster `conda` alternative) package manager.

Reviewer 2: This is becoming less true as the faster engine got into conda. Maybe worth asking someone from the conda team.

Author: Good point, @jaimergp perhaps you could clarify whether it seems worthwhile to distinguish between `conda` and `mamba` here?

Author: If I understand correctly, (broadly speaking, from a non-expert user perspective)

- `conda` now provides the speed and effectively all of the benefits `mamba` used to have
- mamba 2.0 makes `mamba` very similar to `micromamba`, which is still more lightweight in a sense than `conda`?

Reviewer 11: I'd mention conda and micromamba. Ultimately it's up to the user though, and their muscle memory. Mamba 2.0 is like micromamba but dynamically linked.

Reviewer 3: I don't agree, `mamba` 2.0 still has the same UX as `mamba` 1.x - so like `conda` not like `minimamba`, see https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/mamba.html#mamba-vs-conda-clis), it's just further improved. And it has features `conda` doesn't have (e.g. `repoquery` is super useful). CLI output is also better, and I think (but am not sure) that downloads are faster as well.

So I'd much prefer to keep `mamba`, as the reasoning for adding it hasn't really changed - it's still a better `conda`.

Reviewer 3: You really have to separate thinking about this from a user perspective vs. from an internals perspective. Dynamic linking is irrelevant to a user, unless it somehow translates into observable differences in behavior.

Author: In which case, I'm inclined to leave this text as is. Given https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/pull/3610, it seems that micromamba is intended to be more developer facing than user facing now. cc @jjerphan for visibility.

Reviewer 12: In a nutshell:
 - `mamba` and `micromamba` are the same program, only their linkage change (`mamba` is dynamically linked, whilst `micromamba` is nearly totally-statically linked)
 - `conda` now uses `libmamba` to solve environments (via `conda-libmamba-solver`), so performance is on par with `mamba`
 - `mamba` and `conda` have differences in features
 - `mamba` is targeting conda-forge by default now

I would recommend using `mamba`.

See [the differences between `mamba` and `micromamba`](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/?tab=readme-ov-file#mamba-vs-micromamba).

You can then install SciPy as follows:

    mamba install scipy

[`Miniforge`]: https://conda-forge.org/download/

### Installing with `pixi`

You can also add SciPy from conda-forge to a [`pixi`] project:

    pixi add scipy

## Installing from the Anaconda Repository

If you instead install `conda` via [`Miniconda`], you can install
[SciPy from the Anaconda repository](https://anaconda.org/anaconda/scipy):

    conda install scipy

> 

Author: do we need to keep this?
